---
Date: 2023-06-13
Author: Jimmy Briggs <jimmy.briggs@jimbrig.com>
Source: medium
Link: https://medium.com/p/992924d262cf
Tags:
  - "#Type/Highlight/Article"
Aliases:
  - "Azure DevOps Best Practices: Process and Overview"
  - "Azure DevOps Best Practices: Process and Overview"
---
# Azure DevOps Best Practices: Process and Overview

## Metadata
- Author: [[Jason Nadrowski]]
- Full Title: Azure DevOps Best Practices: Process and Overview
- Category: #Type/Highlight/Article
- URL: https://medium.com/p/992924d262cf

## Highlights
- don’t feel you have to use every feature of Azure DevOps immediately. Remember the Agile Manifesto states “Individuals and interactions over processes and tools”. Focus on what works for your team.
- Azure DevOps is designed to follow an Organization/Project hierarchy. Specifically, your DevOps projects are defined by the following URL: https://dev.azure.com/OrganizationName/ProjectName.
- Avoid combining unrelated projects into one project (i.e. https://dev.azure.com/OrganizationName/Project1AndProject2) as a means to provide consolidated reporting. Instead, you should leverage Project and organization-scoped queries.
- Azure DevOps allows you to create dashboards with pre-built and/or custom widgets. Your custom widgets could provide organization-scoped queries.
- You should look to PowerBI to report on your portfolio of projects. PowerBI integrates with Azure DevOps through Azure DevOps Analytics.
- Azure DevOps supports Scaled Agile. With scaled agile, you have break up a large project across several agile teams. Azure DevOps uses areas to create a hierarchy of projects. An example Fabrikam hierarchy is shown below. I suggest you view Microsoft’s video walk-through of Agile at Scale to get started.
- word of warning before you go down this path with Azure DevOps areas. One of the tenants of the Twelve-Factor app [and Beyond the Twelve-Factor Application] is “One codebase, one application”. When you use areas, you are essentially using one codebase with several applications. Although you can leverage security to separate the areas, I have found this to be a weak barrier with substantial potential to blend the application codebases.
- recommend creating a wiki page for the Project Charter and embedding it within the About this project widget.
- Dashboards provide an enormous amount of flexibility to showcase the state of your project. I view them as personalizations and I feel its inappropriate to specify a rigid design. However, I recommend that your organization have a consistent, but flexible, dashboard experience across all the projects. That consistency allows others — less familiar with the project — to quickly view the state of the project.
- I strongly recommend using the Azure DevOps wiki. Its a great way to share project information. Azure DevOps provides processes to support sophisticated wikis. However, I prefer the simpler Provisioned wikis over the published code as a wiki. I find that choice makes it easier to create and update project information.
- In addition, to the wiki, you might leverage SharePoint, Teams, Slack and a whole host of other mediums for project communications and documentation. That is perfectly fine. But, you should ensure these are clearly listed and linked-to in the wiki.
- Even if it exists, on another medium, I put the Agile Project Charter (or Vision depending on your process) on the wiki home page. I then use that wiki home page to populate the “About this project” for the Summary.
- There are a lot of great resources online to help you with the project’s Agile Project Charter, but I prefer Mike Griffiths template shown below.
- For: Target customers
  Who: Need (opportunity or problem)
  The: Product/service name
  Is a: Product category
  That: Key benefits / reason to buy
  Unlike: Primary competitive alternative(s)
  We: Primary differentiation
- In addition to the Project Charter, I recommend posting and/or linking-to the following artifacts on the wiki.
- Product Roadmap
- Release Plan
- Sprint Planing Summaries
- Sprint Retrospective Summaries
- Release Retrospective Summaries
- Product Backlog (if not automatically generated by Azure DevOps)
- Sprint Backlog (if not automatically generated by Azure DevOps)
